hello max fun thank you everybody for
tuning in this is question number 2 with
Tom rocks Max and I love mathematics the
winning question this week is how long
would it take for an object to sink to
the bottom of the ocean now this is a
really great question you have a lot of
fun with it as you'll see and I really
like it because my PhD was in fluid
mechanics and this is a fluid mechanics
problem so I made up so thank you for
sending the question in and thank you
for everybody that voted so to kick off
with there are two things
two bits of information that we need we
need to decide what our object is that's
thinking and also in which ocean is it
sinking so we know how deep the ocean is
so here are the four deepest points in
each of the four main Ocean the Pacific
Atlantic Indian and Arctic and you can
see that the Marianas Trench is the
deepest point of the ocean anywhere on
earth over and it has been kilometers
deep which is insane so we have our four
deepest points of four different oceans
and now we have our objects so we're
going to consider assess a streamlined
body so almost like a raindrop shape
designed to have very good aerodynamics
and therefore would fall quite fast a
cube you say bolts and the Eiffel Tower
I'm going to work out how long it would
take each of these five objects to sink
to the bottom of the four different
oceans the key mass equation that we
need to be as assaulted problem called
the drag equation and this is a piece of
map by Lord Rayleigh as well as familiar
with the drag equation he also was part
of the discovery of the noble gas argon
and yes he won the Nobel Prize for
Physics in 1904 for the discovery and
his equation here the drag equation so
this tells you the force that acts on an
object when it is moving through a fluid
so your force is given by F D D for drag
you have a factor of 1/2 we have Rose
the density of the fluid we have V
squared which is the speed at which the
object is moving through the fluid
squared we have CP which is called the
drag coefficient and this will vary
depending on the object and we're going
to work it out or calculate it for our
five objects in the moment and finally
we have a where a here is the projected
two-dimensional area of our object so it
seems like the sphere and the cube we
can notice exactly but for the other
ones about estimator bit but basically a
represents the size of your object
we now need a second piece of physics a
second
mathematical equation which comes from
another British mathematician and
physicist Sir Isaac Newton and it's his
most famous law his second law force
equals mass times acceleration for an
object falling to the bottom of the
ocean which has being dropped at the
service items left to form it's falling
under gravity and gravity is basically
an acceleration that's pulling things
towards the centum fear and we know what
gravitational acceleration is is equal
to G which is 9.81 meters per second
squared so for acceleration force is
equal mass times gravity and when the
object is falling these two forces will
be in balance because we're going to
ignore other things like buoyancy
effects and turbulence I'm going to keep
the problem nice and simple and so
acquainting the drag force and the
acceleration force on gravity and
rearranging a solving you get your
terminal velocity given by this equation
and the terminal velocity is the maximum
speed that a falling object can reach as
it falls through a fluid so initially of
course the object has no two speed as
you drop it and then it accelerates
under gravity and it will eventually
reach a terminal sort of maximum peak
velocity and it will then fall at that
speed and what we're going to do is
assume that the object will fall
from the surface to the bottom of the
ocean at one of these depths constantly
at the terminal velocity speed and this
will give us an approximation of how
fast the object falls and therefore
because we know how deep the ocean is
how long it will take for the object to
reach the bottom of the ocean so I
filled in some of the data in the table
for the drag coefficient the area and
the mass for some of these objects well
some of them it's really quite tricky
and again we've got to make a few more
decisions or few more assumptions before
we can get the correct numbers for
example for a sphere we know the drag
coefficient from experiments we know
what the area of the sphere will be is
pi times the radius squared but the mass
of the sphere will depend on what it's
made from
so if it's a sphere of sort of crumpled
up paper for example it won't weigh very
much but it is a sphere made of legs so
we really have it so we're going to
decide what else is laid out of to know
the mass the same for the streamlined
body in the cube we need to know what
they're made out of so I've made a few
more assumptions a few more decisions
are now filled in the whole table so we
have a sphere which is going to be one
meter in diameter and to remain out for
lead for our streamlined body and our
cube
I'm actually going to use these two to
demonstrate how important this drag
coefficient is because this one is
streamlined is very aerodynamics of a
very small drag coefficient compared to
a cube which is not very aerodynamic so
we're going to assume that they're both
made of steel and as the cube is one
meter cubed of Steel hasn't very heavily
and I'm going to also issue that the
streamline body is such that it has the
same area and the same mass so the only
difference between these two is going to
be the drag coefficient because of the
shape having now crunched the numbers
and work out the terminal velocity of
all our objects we can see that you say
for what is actually the slowest of all
of our objects and we the Eiffel Tower
will actually fall at a reasonably
similar speed to a 1 meter letter and
you want me to steal cue they will have
fallen of roughly the same terminal
velocity as something as big as the
Eiffel Tower it is quite incredible to
think about and now of course that we
have the terminal velocity we simply do
the depth divided by the velocity began
estimate for the time so rather than go
through the time taken to sync to all of
these very different depths of course
the longest time will occur for the the
deepest point so we're just going to
concentrate on that one you can of
course use these numbers and work out
the time for all the others or any other
depth that you want now we have all of
the data
so first up our one meter lead fear this
would take around 10 minutes to sink to
the bottom of the Marianas Trench our
streamlined body suppose you've seen the
highest terminal velocity so it's going
to sink the fastest this will only take
three minutes to sink to the bottom
which is really quite incredible how
fast that would be of course in reality
it will be a little bit slower because
of its initial acceleration it doesn't
instantly reach its speed of 62 meters
per second which is insanely quick but
it will eventually get there and then
travel it out to be constantly down to
the depth our cubes so this is the same
mass from the same area as our
streamlined body which is has a word
shape a less aerodynamic shape and they
will actually take five times longer for
the cube to sink to the bottom of the
Marianas Trench so it shows the
importance of the this drag coefficient
and how aerodynamic the object actually
is Usain Bolt
we've already spotted he's got the
smallest terminal velocity of all of our
object so expect me to take along it and
that of course is true and it would
actually take him around two and a half
hours to sinks to the bottom of the
ocean
and finally the Eiffel Tower so despite
being such a huge massive object with a
massive 7.3 million kilogram
it actually doesn't have the highest
terminal velocity and it would actually
take the Eiffel Tower around 12 minutes
to sink to the bottom of the Marianas
Trench
so our fastest object would be the
streamline body despite being the one of
the smaller objects we're considering
and are slow subject would be Usain Bolt
so sorry you say but you can't win them
all thank you very much for everyone for
watching thank you as always sending in
your questions and voting and remember
get your questions in to tom rock matt
and i love matt mattox ready for the
dirt questions and of course get voting
for your favorite share with all your
friends and make sure everyone else
votes for the question that you want
answered next time